\input texinfo   @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename mpdpopm.info
@settitle mpdpopm
@include version.texi
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Music
@direntry
* mpdpopm: (mpdpopm). Maintain ratings & playcounts for your mpd server.
@end direntry

@copying
This manual corresponds to mpdpopm version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2021-2025 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@@pobox.com>

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.

A copy of the license is also available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

This document was typeset with
@uref{http://www.texinfo.org/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@c title & copyright-- won't appear in online output.
@titlepage
@title mpdpopm
@subtitle Maintain ratings & playcounts for your mpd server.
@author @email{sp1ff@@pobox.com}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@c ``top'' node-- this is the start of the online output, but doesn't
@c appear in the printed manual
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top mpdpopm

Maintain ratings & playcounts for your mpd server.

This manual corresponds to mpdpopm version @value{VERSION}.

@end ifnottex

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Introduction::
* Getting Started::
* The commands::
* Advanced Usage::
* Sample Configuration File::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@url{https://github.com/sp1ff/mpdpopm, mpdpopm} provides a companion
daemon to @url{https://www.musicpd.org/, MPD} that will maintain play
counts, ratings, & last-played timestamps for your music library,
along with an associated CLI for talking to the companion
daemon. Similar to @url{https://github.com/vincent-petithory/mpdfav,
mpdfav}, but written in Rust (which I prefer to Go), it will maintain
this information in your sticker database. Along the lines of
@url{https://alip.github.io/mpdcron, mpdcron}, it will also allow you
to keep that information up-to-date in your tags or other data stores
by invoking external (user-provided & -configured) commands.

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

NB. The project @url{https://github.com/sp1ff/mpdpopm, README}
contains the reference instructions for @code{mpdpopm} installation.

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Prerequisites::
* Installing mpdpopm::
* Setting up mpdpopm::
@end menu

@node Prerequisites
@section Prerequisites

@cindex prerequisites

@code{mpdpopm} is distributed in a number of formats. The
prerequisites depend on the distribution format, but in any event you
need to have @code{MPD} installed & running in order to use
@code{mpdpopm}. See also @ref{Setting up mpd}.

The pre-built binary distribution, the Debian package, and the Arch User
Repository packages require no other pre-requisites.

Downloading @code{mpdpopm} from @url{https://crates.io/crates/mpdpopm,
crates.io} requires the Rust toolchain.

Building from source via the Autotools distribution further requires
the Gnu
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/html_node/Autotools-Introduction.html,
Autools}.

@node Installing mpdpopm
@section Installing mpdpopm

@cindex installing

@code{mpdpopm} may be installed in a number of ways. Refer to the
project @url{https://github.com/sp1ff/mpdpopm, README} for the most
up-to-date instructions.

@enumerate

@item
Pre-built binaries are available for Linux & MacOS.

@item
@code{mpdpopm} can be installed from
@url{https://crates.io/crates/mpdpopm, crates.io}.

@item
There is a binary package available for x86_64 Debian-based Linux systems.

@item
There are Arch packages available at the @url{https://aur.archlinux.org/packages?O=0&K=mpdpopm, Arch User Repository}.

@item
There is an Autotools-based distribution available.

@end enumerate

@node Setting up mpdpopm
@section Setting up mpdpopm

mpdpopm provides two programs:

@enumerate

@item
@code{mppopmd} is the companion daemon process to MPD

@item
@code{mppopm} is the command-line interface to @code{mppopmd}

@end enumerate

Both programs make use of the MPD
@url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/protocol.html, protocol}, a
simple text-based protocol by which clients can communicate with the
MPD daemon and with one another. From the perspective of
MPD, @code{mppopm} & @code{mppopmd} are just new clients. Via
this protocol @code{mppopmd} will monitor MPD for song playback
& note when songs complete; this is how it knows to increment the
playcount & update the last played timestamp for each song to which
you listen.

Also via the protocol, MPD clients can communicate with one
another by registering "channels" and subscribing to them; one client
can send a message to a given channel, and all other clients
subscribed to that channel will receive that message. In particular,
if an MPD client sends the "rating" command to the
@code{mppopmd} commands channel (the channel name is configurable, but
defaults to "unwoundstack.com:commands"), @code{mppopmd} will set the
rating for the given track.

The mechanism by which @code{mppopmd} records this information (i.e
play counts, last played and ratings) is MPD
@url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/protocol.html#stickers,
stickers}. A sticker is a little bit of textual information which
clients can attach to songs in the form of a name-value
pair. @code{mpdpopm} defines a new sticker name (again configurable)
for each of these items & updates the values for each song when & as
requested.

Of course, other MPD clients will not, in general, be aware of
@code{mppopmd}, its command channel, or the stickers it sets: you the
user will have to bridge that gap. You could of course just fire-up
@code{netcat} & start sending commands, but that's not particularly
convenient. That's where @code{mppopm} comes in. It is a small
command-line tool for controlling the @code{mppopmd} daemon; you could
for instance say @command{mppopm set-rating '*****'} to rate the
current track at five stars. Under the hood, it connects to the MPD
daemon, sends a "rating" message to the @code{mppopmd} commands
channel, and @code{mppopmd}, in turn, tells MPD to set the rating
sticker for the curren track to 255 (more on the rating system below).

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Setting up mpd::
* Setting up mppopmd::
* Setting up mppopm::
@end menu

@node Setting up mpd
@subsection Setting-up mpd

Configuring & setting up MPD is beyond the scope of this
manual; see the MPD manual
@url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/user.html, here}.

@cindex configuration, mpd

One note, however: in order for @code{mpdpopm} to function, MPD
must be configured to enable the sticker database. This is done via
the @code{sticker_file} configuration item. The user as whom
@code{mppopmd} is run will need access to the file named therein and
its parent directories. See
@url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/user.html#the-sticker-database,
here} for details.

@node Setting up mppopmd
@subsection Setting up mppopmd

@code{mppopmd} is the companion daemon to MPD. Once installed, most
configuration items have sensible defaults, but there are a few that
will need to be customized to the user's particular taste (mostly
having to do with their MPD configuration).

It is recommended that it be run in the foreground initially (using
the @option{-F} flag) for purposes of trouble-shooting, but after
that the user will likely want to run it as a daemon.

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* mppopmd Configuration::
* mppopmd as a Daemon::
@end menu

@node mppopmd Configuration
@subsubsection mppopmd Configuration

@cindex configuration, mppopmd

The configuration file's location is specified on the @code{mppopmd}
command-line (using the @option{-c} flag). It takes the form of a LISP
S-expression in which each top-level configuration item is a cons
cell. LISP comments will be ignored.

General-purpose items:

@itemize

@item
@code{host} The network address on which the MPD daemon is
listening. It should match @code{bind_to_address} in your MPD
configuration file. The default value is "localhost".

@item
@code{port} The TCP port on which the MPD daemon is listening. This
should match the @code{port} setting in your MPD configuration
file. The default value is 6600.

@item
@code{local_music_dir} The root of your MPD music directory, as seen
from this host. This will be used to evaluate the @code{%full-file}
and @code{%current-file} replacement parameters when executing
commands (@pxref{Keeping Your Tags Up-to-date, below}).

@item
@code{log} The file to which the daemon will log when running in the
background (if you specify the @option{-F} flag, to run it in the
foreground, it will log to @code{stdout}); no log rotation is
provided, so setup @command{logrotate}, run it under @command{systemd}
(see @pxref{mppopmd as a Daemon, below}) or keep an eye on it so it
doesn't grow too large.

@item
@code{commands_chan} The name of the MPD channel on which
@code{mppopmd} shall listen for commands ("unwoundstack.com:commands"
by default).

@end itemize

Configuration items related to maintaining play counts & last-played
timestamps:

@itemize

@item
@code{playcount_sticker} The sticker name @code{mpdpopm} will use to
store play counts (defaults to "unwoundstack.com:playcount").

@item
@code{lastplayed_sticker} The sticker name mpdpopm will use to store
the last played timestamp (defaults to "unwoundstack.com:lastplayed")

@item
@code{played_thresh} The percentage of a song's duration that must be
played back in order for it to be considered as "played", expressed as
number between 0 & 1 (defaults to 0.6).

@item
@code{poll_interval_ms} The amount of time, in milliseconds, between
polls of MPD by @code{mppopmd} to check on playback progress. This is
the error bound on detection of song having been ``played'' in that if
a poll is performed the instant before the current song's playback
reaches @code{played_thresh}, it may be up to this many milliseconds
before @code{mppopmd} tries again and belatedly determines that the
current track has been ``played'' (and hence updates the playcount,
last played time &c). Since this is not, in general, a time-sensitive
operation, the default setting is 5000 (i.e. five seconds) to keep
network traffic down.

@item
@code{playcount_command} An optional name of a program to run when the
play count is incremented; this should be an absolute path. Use
@code{playcount_command_args} to specify arguments to this
command. The intent behind this feature is to enable the user to keep
other data stores (such as ID3 tags) up-to-date with play count
information (@pxref{Keeping Your Tags Up-to-date, below})

@item
@code{playcount_command_args} An array of arguments to specify to the
playcount command; arguments may contain replacement parameters that
will be filled in at the time of execution.

@end itemize

Configuration items related to ratings:

@itemize

@item
@code{rating_sticker} The sticker name @code{mppopmd} will use to
store the rating (defaults to "unwoundstack.com:rating").

@code{ratings_command} An optional name of a program to run when the
rating is set; this should be an absolute path. Use
@code{ratings_command_args} to specify arguments to this command.  The
intent behind this feature is to enable the user to keep other data
stores (such as ID3 tags) up-to-date with play count information (on
which more @pxref{Keeping Your Tags Up-to-date, below}).

@code{ratings_command_args} An array of arguments to specify to the
ratings command; arguments may contain replacement parameters that
will be filled in at the time of execution.

@end itemize

Finally, the configuration for generalized commands is not described
here, but rather under @ref{Generalized Commands}.

@code{mpdpopm} ships with a minimal sample configuration file. A more
expansive sample appears at the end of this manual (@pxref{Sample
Configuration File}).

@node mppopmd as a Daemon
@subsubsection mppopmd as a Daemon

Once you've got your configuration file prepared, you should probably
start the daemon in the foreground for ease of trouble-shooting. I
suggest starting it with the @option{-v} flag ("verbose") the first
time, as well (there's also a @option{-d} flag which will produce more
copious debug output). You should expect to see something like this:

@smallexample
mppopmd -v -F -c <path to configuration file>
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.620806454-08:00][mppopmd] mppopmd 0.2.2 logging at level Debug.
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.621395828-08:00][mpdpopm] mpdpopm 0.2.2 beginning.
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.621998677-08:00][mpdpopm::clients] Connected 0.22.0.
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.623398521-08:00][mpdpopm::clients] Connected 0.22.0.
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.623874861-08:00][mpdpopm::clients] Sent subscribe message for unwoundstack.com:commands; got `OK
'.
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.623888424-08:00][mpdpopm::clients] Subscribed to unwoundstack.com:commands.
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.624985027-08:00][mpdpopm] selecting...
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.628412738-08:00][mpdpopm] output status is Ok(
    Output @{
        status: ExitStatus(
            ExitStatus(
                0,
            ),
        ),
        stdout: "/home/sp1ff\n",
        stderr: "",
    @},
)
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.628778521-08:00][mpdpopm] No database update needed
[2020-12-12T15:26:19.628817190-08:00][mpdpopm] No more commands to process.
@end smallexample

At this point @code{mppopmd} is just sitting around, waiting for
something to happen. Bring up your favorite MPD client & start playing
a track. That should induce some activity:

@smallexample
[2020-12-12T15:26:29.522581696-08:00][mpdpopm::clients] Sent idle message; got `changed: player
OK
'.
[2020-12-12T15:26:29.522756287-08:00][mpdpopm] subsystem Player changed
[2020-12-12T15:26:29.527064915-08:00][mpdpopm::playcounts] Updating status: 0.000% complete.
...
[2020-12-12T15:28:19.653519123-08:00][mpdpopm::playcounts] Updating status: 60.698% complete.
[2020-12-12T15:28:19.653569350-08:00][mpdpopm::playcounts] Increment play count for 'M/Miles Davis - Boplicity.mp3' (songid: 262) at 0.6069790770994554 played.
[2020-12-12T15:28:19.661696678-08:00][mpdpopm::clients] Sent message `sticker get song "M/Miles Davis - Boplicity.mp3" "unwoundstack.com:playcount"'; got `sticker: unwoundstack.com:playcount=3
OK
'
[2020-12-12T15:28:19.661743547-08:00][mpdpopm::playcounts] Current PC is 3.
[2020-12-12T15:28:19.770956673-08:00][mpdpopm::clients] Sent `sticker set song "M/Miles Davis - Boplicity.mp3" "unwoundstack.com:lastplayed" "1607815699"'; got `OK
'
[2020-12-12T15:28:19.868244915-08:00][mpdpopm::clients] Sent `sticker set song "M/Miles Davis - Boplicity.mp3" "unwoundstack.com:playcount" "4"'; got `OK
'
...
@end smallexample

In this example, @code{mppopmd} noticed that "Boplicity" by Miles
Davis started playing; when it was played 60% of the way through, the
daemon updated the play count from 3 to 4 & set the last played
timestamp.

Once things seem to be working, you might consider removing the
@option{-F} flag & running @code{mppopmd} as a proper
daemon. @code{mpdpopm} ships with a sample systemd unit if you'd like to
run it that way.

@node Setting up mppopm
@subsection Setting up mppopm

On it's own, @code{mppopmd} will happily sit in the background,
monitoring playback & keeping play counts & last-played timestamps
up-to-date. In order to rate a song, or indeed to @emph{do} anything
with the information that's being accumulated, the user will need to
induce their favorite MPD client to send the relevant commands
(@pxref{mppopmd Commands}) to the @code{mppopmd} commands channel
(@pxref{mppopmd Configuration}), or fire-up something like
@code{netcat} and start entering the commands manually.

Since neither of those options are likely to be convenient,
@code{mpdpopm} ships with a small, purpose-built MPD client:
@code{mppopm} (@pxref{mppopm Commands}).

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* mppopm Configuration::
@end menu

@node mppopm Configuration
@subsubsection mppopm Configuration

@cindex configuration, mppopm

The @code{mppopm} CLI needs to know where to find the MPD daemon, as
well as the names of the @code{mpdpopm} commands channel & sticker
names. These configuration items all have default values.  They may
also be specified on the command line, a configuration file, or an
environment variable. The order of presendence is:

@enumerate

@item
command-line arguments

@item
the configuration file

@item
environment

@end enumerate

The configuration file defaults to @command{~/.mppopm}, but may be
specified on the command line. Like that of @code{mppopmd}, it is a
LISP S-expression, where each item is a cons cell.

The @code{mppopm} configuration items:

@itemize

@item
@option{host}: The host on which MPD is listening; defaults to ``localhost'',
command-line option @option{-H}, environment variable @code{MPD_HOST}

@item
@option{port}: The port at which MPD is listening; defaults to 6600,
command-line option @option{-p}, environment variable @code{MPD_PORT}

@item
@option{commands_chan}: The commands channel to which your
@code{mppopmd} daemon is subscribed (i.e. should match the
@option{commands_chan} setting in your daemon's configuration);
defaults to ``unwoundstack.com:commands''. No command-line option or
environment variable.

@item
@option{playcount_sticker}: The sticker name being used by your
@code{mppopmd} daemon to store playcounts (i.e. should match the
daemon's configuration item of the same name); defaults to
``unwoundstack.com:playcount''. No command-line option or environment
variable.

@item
@option{lastplayed_sticker}: The sticker name being used by your
@code{mppopmd} daemon to store last-played timestamps (i.e. should
match the daemon's configuration item of the same name); defaults to
``unwoundstack.com:lastplayed''. No command-line option or environment
variable.

@item
@option{rating_sticker}: The sticker name being used by your
@code{mppopmd} daemon to store ratings (i.e. should match the daemon's
configuration item of the same name); defaults to
``unwoundstack.com:rating. No command-line option or environment
variable.

@end itemize

@node The commands
@chapter The commands

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* mppopm Commands::
* mppopmd Commands::
@end menu

@node mppopm Commands
@section mppopm Commands

@code{mppopm} supports a number of sub-commands for carrying out
various operations related to @code{mpdpopm}. You can always see the
complete list of sub-commands your particular build of @code{mppopm}
supports by saying @command{mppopm --help}, and get detailed help on a
particular sub-command by saying @command{mppopm SUB-COMMAND --help}.

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* @code{mppopm} Rating Commands::
* @code{mppopm} Play Count Commands::
* @code{mppopm} Last Played Commands::
* @code{mppopm} Filter Commands::
@end menu

@node @code{mppopm} Rating Commands
@subsection @code{mppopm} Rating Commands

@cindex commands, rating

@code{mppopm} can be used to set & retrieve ratings for your music
library. It can also be used to filter on the basis of rating
@ref{@code{mppopm} Filter Commands}.

@command{mppopm get-rating} will retrieve the current song's rating &
print it on @code{stdout}. @command{mppopm get-rating URI} will
interpret ``URI'' as an MPD song URI & display it's rating on
@code{stdout}. @command{mppopm get-rating URI...} will do the same for
multiple songs. Ratings are expressed as an integer between 0 & 255
inclusive, with the convention that a rating of zero denotes
``un-rated''.

@command{mppopm set-rating ARG} will set the current song's rating to
``ARG''.  ``ARG'' may be an integer between 0 & 255, or it may be
expressed as one to five ``stars'': ``*'' deontes one star, ``**'' two
stars and so forth.  ``Stars'' are mapped to numeric ratings as per
@url{http://forums.winamp.com/showpost.php?p=2903240&postcount=94,
Winamp}:

@table @asis

@item *
1

@item **
64

@item ***
128

@item ****
196

@item *****
255

@end table

Finally, @command{mppopm set-rating ARG SONG} will interpret ``SONG''
as a song URI & set that song's rating to ``ARG''.

@node @code{mppopm} Play Count Commands
@subsection @code{mppopm} Play Count Commands

@cindex commands, play count

@command{mppopm get-pc} will print the play count of the current song
on @code{stdout}. @command{mppopm get-pc ARG} will interpret ``ARG''
as a song URI & print that song's play count to @code{stdout}.
@command{mppopm get-pc ARG...} will print the play count for each
argument on @code{stdout}.

@command{mppopm set-pc ARG} will set the play count for the current
song to ``ARG'', where ``ARG'' is an unsigned integer. @command{mppopm
set-pc ARG SONG} will set the play count for ``SONG'' to ``ARG''.

@node @code{mppopm} Last Played Commands
@subsection @code{mppopm} Last Played Commands

@cindex commands, last played

@command{mppopm get-lp} will print the last played time of the current
song in seconds since Unix epoch on @code{stdout}. @command{mppopm
get-lp ARG} will interpret ``ARG'' as a song URI & print that song's
last played timestamp to @code{stdout}.  @command{mppopm get-lp
ARG...} will print the last played timestamp for each argument on
@code{stdout}.

@command{mppopm set-lp ARG} will set the last played timestamp for the
current song to ``ARG'', where ``ARG'' is an unsigned integer
interpreted as seconds since Unix epoch. @command{mppopm set-lp ARG
SONG} will set the last played timestamp for ``SONG'' to ``ARG''.

@node @code{mppopm} Filter Commands
@subsection @code{mppopm} Filter Commands

@cindex commands, filters

Having accumulated play counts, ratings &c in one's sticker database
one can now begin acting on that information. For instance, here is a
bash shell script to add all un-rated songs to the play queue:

@smallexample
exec 3<>/dev/tcp/localhost/6600;
head -1 <&3

declare -A rated
last_file=""
echo "sticker find song \"\" unwoundstack.com:rating" >&3
while true; do
    read -r -u 3 line
    case $line in
        OK*)
            break;;
        ACK*)
            echo "$line" >&2;
            exit 1;;
        file:*)
            last_file="$@{line:6@}";;
        sticker:*)
            rated["$last_file"]="$@{line:33@}";
            last_file="";;
        *)
            echo "error: $line" >&2;
            exit 1;;
    esac
done

exec 4<>/dev/tcp/localhost/6600;
head -1 <&4
echo "command_list_begin" >&4

echo "listall" >&3
while true; do
    read -r -u 3 line
    case $line in
        OK*)
            break;;
        ACK*)
            echo "$line" >&2;
            exit 1;;
        file:*)
            if test -z "$@{rated[$@{line:6@}]@}" -o "$@{rated[$@{line:6@}]@}" == "0"; then
                echo "adding $@{line:6@}"
                echo "add \"$@{line:6@}\"" >&4
            fi;;
    esac
done

exec 3<&-
echo "command_list_end" >&4
head -1 <&4
exec 4<&-
@end smallexample

In search of a more ergonomic way to make use of this information,
@code{mpdpopm} now has support for
filters. @url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/protocol.html#filters,
Filters} are an MPD feature for searching one's song database; one can
select songs for various operations by filters such as ``(artist =~
'pogues')'', for instance. @code{mpdpopm}'s contribution is to extend
the MPD filter syntax to add ratings, play counts & last-played
timestamps (``rating'', ``playcount'' & ``lastplayed'' resp.) to the
filter syntax.

The first two filter-related commands added to @code{mppopm} are
@command{searchadd} and @command{findadd}. Each accepts a filter as an
argument and adds the selected songs to the the play queue. The only
difference is that @command{searchadd} works case-insensitively &
@command{findadd} respects case.

Consequently, the shell script above can now be replaced by
the command @command{mppopm findadd ``(rating == 0)''}. NB. filter
syntax requires textual values to be quoted, so you'll need to escape
them for the shell. For instance, to select songs with an artist like
``pogues'', the filter syntax would be (artist =~ ``pogues''), so
to specify this on the command line, you would have to escape the double
quotes: @command{mppopm searchadd ``(artist =~ \"pogues\")''}.

See below for a detailed description of filter syntax & quoting
issues.

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* mppopm Filter Syntax::
* mppopm Filter Quoting::
@end menu

@node mppopm Filter Syntax
@subsubsection @code{mppopm} Filter Syntax

@cindex filters, syntax

The @code{mpdpopm} filter syntax is a (small) superset of the MPD
@url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/protocol.html#filters,
syntax}. The following is a grammar for filter expressions in
modified BNF:

@smallexample
<expr> ::= <term> | <negation> | <conjunction> | <disjunction>
           
<term> ::= "(" <comparison> ")"

<negation> ::= "(" "!" <expr> ")"

<conjunction> ::= "(" <conj-list> ")"

<conj-list> ::= <expr> "AND" <expr> |
                <expr> "AND" <conj-list>

<disjunction> ::= "(" <disj-list> ")"

<disj-list> ::= <expr> "OR" <expr> |
                <expr> "OR" <disj-list>

<comparison> ::= <tag> <op> <qtext>                             |
                 "file" "==" <qtext>                            |
                 "base" <qtext>                                 |
                 "modified-since" <qtext>                       |
                 "AudioFormat" <audio-format-op> <audio-format> |
                 <mpdpopm-numeric-tag> <numeric-op> <number>    |
                 "lastplayed" <numeric-op> <date-or-epoch>

<tag> ::= "artist" | "artistsort" | "album" | "albumsort" |
          "albumartist" | "albumartistsort" | "title" | "track" |
          "name" | "genre" | "date" | "originaldate" | "composer" |
          "performer" | "conductor" | "work | "grouping" | "comment" |
          "disc" | "label" | "musicbrainz_artistid" |
          "musicbrainz_albumid" | "musicbrainz_albumartistid" |
          "musicbrainz_trackid" | "musicbrainz_releasetrackid" |
          "musicbrainz_workid"

<op> ::= "==" | "!=" | "contains" | "=~" | "!~"

<audio-format-op> ::= "==" | "=~"

<audio-format> ::= "'" <samplerate>:<bits>:<channels> "'"

<mpdpopm-numeric-tag> ::= "rating" | "playcount"

<numeric-op> ::= "==" | "!=" | "<" | "<=" | ">" | ">="

<number> ::= [0-9]+

<qtext> ::= text enclosed in either single- or double-quotes; if the text
            contains single- or double-quotes, or backslashes, they shall
            be backslash-escaped

<date-or-epoch> ::= either <number> or a single- or double-quoted ISO
                    8601 timestamp
@end smallexample

In the above grammar, the non-terminals @code{<samplerate>},
@code{<bits>}, and @code{<channels>} are undefined; please see the MPD
@url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/user.html#audio-output-format,
manual} for details on how to specify them.

Note that tags are matched without regard to case; for consistency's
sake, @code{mpdpopm}-defined attributes are also matched
case-insensitively.

For a detailed description of how tags are matched, also please see
the MPD @url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/protocol.html#tags,
manual}, since @code{mpdpopm} delegates the evaluation of all terms
already supported by MPD to thereto.

@node mppopm Filter Quoting
@subsubsection @code{mppopm} Filter Quoting

@cindex filters, quoting

The non-terminal @code{qtext} appears frequently in the @code{mpdpopm}
filter grammar (@pxref{mppopm Filter Syntax}). These textual tokens
are required to be enclosed in quotation marks, either by single-quote
or a double-quote characters (ASCII characters 39 or 34, respectively;
cf.
@url{https://github.com/MusicPlayerDaemon/MPD/blob/master/src/song/Filter.cxx#L169,
ExpectQuoted} in the MPD codebase) This brings up the question of how
to represent single- or double-quotes inside the quoted text. MPD
employs the time-honored tradition of ``escaping'' them with a
backslash character (ASCII character 92).  This then implies that
@emph{backslashes} in the quoted text must themselves be
backslash-escaped.

For example, to test against the text

@example
foo\bar''
@end example

using double-quotes, we would enclose the text in @code{"} characters,
and backslash-escape any @code{"}, @code{'}, and @code{\} characters
therein, to obtain

@example
"foo\\bar\""
@end example

We could also choose to quote the text using single-quotes in the same
manner:

@example
'foo\\bar\"'
@end example

Tragically, to use this text in a filter in the shell with
@code{mppopm}, we will need to @emph{again} quote the text in order to
protect special characters therein from the shell.

Let us suppose we had songs by the pathologically named artist
foo\bar''. A properly quoted filter expression would be:

@example
(artist == "foo\\bar\"")
@end example

To invoke this on the command line, however, we would need to quote
the filter itself (to make it into a single argument for
@code{mppopm}), which would require quoting the entire filter:

@example
mppopm findadd "(artist =~ \"foo\\\\bar\\\"\")"
@end example

In this particular case, quoting the filter using single-quotes
might be simpler

@example
mppopm findadd '(artist == "foo\\bar\"")'
@end example

If the artist name contained a single-quote, e.g.

@example
foo'bar
@end example

We could quote it using @code{"}s

@example
(artist =~ "foo\'bar")
@end example

but to express this in the shell we would need to protect the
single-quote from bash:

@example
mppopm findadd '(artist =~ "foo\'"'"'bar")'
@end example

Quoting the artist name using @code{'}s, and protecting @emph{that}
from the shell is left as an exercise for the reader.

@node mppopmd Commands
@section mppopmd Commands

@cindex commands, mppopmd

This section discusses @code{mppopmd} command syntax & will be of
interest only to authors of MPD clients that want to communicate
with @code{mppopmd}.

Clients can invoke @code{mppopmd} commands via the
@url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/protocol.html#client-to-client,
sendmessage} MPD command to the @code{mppopmd} commands channel, e.g.

@example
$>: nc localhost 6600
OK MPD 0.22.0
sendmessage unwoundstack.com:commands "rate 255"
OK
@end example

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Quoting::
* Supported Commands::
@end menu

@node Quoting
@subsection Quoting

@cindex filters, quoting (mppopmd)

The sendmessage command takes two string arguments: the channel & the
message.  Both must be quoted according to the rules of the MPD
protocol. Per the MPD
@url{https://www.musicpd.org/doc/html/protocol.html#requests, manual},
``If arguments contain spaces, they should be surrounded by double
quotation marks''.

More generally, in the MPD protocol:

@enumerate

@item
an un-quoted token may contain any printable ASCII character except
space, tab, @code{'} & @code{"}

@item
to include spaces, tabs, @code{'}-s or @code{"}-s, the token must be
enclosed in @code{"}-s, and any @code{"}-s or @code{\}-s therein must
be backslash escaped. NB. @code{'}s need @emph{not} be escaped, if
they occur within a quoted string (although doing so is harmless)

@end enumerate

Since @code{mppopmd} commands generally take arguments, they will
contain spaces, and hence need to be quoted. For instance, the
``rate'' command above takes at least one argument (the rating)
and so the text ``rate 255'' had to be enclosed in double-quotes.

Commands that take filters as arguments will not only contain spaces,
but also @code{"}s and/or @code{'}s and possible backslashes, so
quoting will be more
involved. Cf. @url{https://github.com/MusicPlayerDaemon/libmpdclient/blob/master/src/quote.c#L59,
libmpdclient} for a reference implemenation of the quoting algorithm.

As a worked example, suppose we wanted to send the findadd command with
the (filter) argument of:

@example
(artist =~ 'foo\'bar')
@end example

The filter itself needs to be quoted to make it a single parameter:

@example
"(artist =~ \'foo\\\'bar\')"
@end example

Giving us a command of

@example
findadd "(artist =~ \'foo\\\'bar\')"
@end example

This contains spaces, so we wrap it in double-quotes and escape all
special characters therein, giving us the final message as it would
appear on the wire:

@smallexample
sendmessage unwoundstack.com:commands "findadd \"(artist =~ \\\'foo\\\\\\\'bar\\\')\""
@end smallexample

See also
@url{https://github.com/MusicPlayerDaemon/MPD/blob/master/src/util/Tokenizer.cxx#L170,
here} for the MPD parsing logic.

@node Supported Commands
@subsection Supported Commands

@code{mppopmd} supports the following commands:

@itemize

@item
@code{rate}: ``rate RATING( TRACK)?'' set the rating to RATING for TRACK if it
is given, or the current track if it is not. If TRACK is given, it will be
interpreted as a song URI.

@item
@code{setpc}: ``setpc PC( TRACK)?'' set the play count to PC for TRACK if it
is given, or the current track if it is not. If TRACK is given, it will be
interpreted as a song URI.

@item
@code{setlp}: ``setlp LP( TRACK)?'' set the last-played timestamp to
LP for TRACK if it is given, or the current track if it is not. If
TRACK is given, it will be interpreted as a song URI.

@item
@code{findadd}: ``findadd FILTER'' apply FILTER in a case-sensitive manner
and add all matching songs to the play queue

@item
@code{searchadd}: ``searchadd FILTER'' apply FILTER in a
case-insensitive manner and add all matching songs to the play queue

@end itemize

@node Advanced Usage
@chapter Advanced Usage

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Keeping Your Tags Up-to-date::
* Generalized Commands::
@end menu

@node Keeping Your Tags Up-to-date
@section Keeping Your Tags Up-to-date

@cindex tags

It may be that the information managed by @code{mpdpopm} is replicated
in other locations. For instance, the author has play counts
@emph{also} recorded in the @code{PCNT} & @code{POPM} frames of the
ID3 tags attached to his music files, and ratings in the @code{POPM}
frame, as well. For that reason, @code{mppopmd} has the ability to run
arbitrary commands after updating stickers. This feature was developed
for the purpose of keeping ID3 tags up-to-date, but one could do
anything (pop up a notification, update a database &c).

The operations of rating a song and of updating its play count (and
associated last played timestamp) may be configured to run an
arbitrary program whenever they are carried out. The two salient
options are @option{rating_command} and @option{playcount_command},
respectively.  If present in the @code{mppopmd} configuration, they
should be the absolute path to the program to be executed.

Each has a partner option specifying the parameters that will be
supplied to the program when it is run (@option{rating_command_args}
and @option{playcount_command_args}, respectively). These options
shall be lists of command-line arguments to be provided, specified as
strings. Each may specify an argument of ``%full-file'' which will, on
command execution, be expanded by @code{mppopmd} to the absolute path
of the song being operated upon.

@option{rating_command_args} may also make use of the ``%rating''
replacement parameter which will be expanded to the rating being
applied (expressed as an integer between 0 & 255 inclusive expressed
in base 10).

@option{playcount_command_args} may also employ the ``%playcount''
replacement parameter which will be the new play count (again expressed
as an integer in base 10).

For example, the author has written an ID3 tagging utility called
@url{https://github.com/sp1ff/scribbu, scribbu} which he uses
to keep his ID3 tags up-to-date. The following two lines, placed
in the @code{mppopmd} configuration file, will cause it to invoke
the command @command{/home/sp1ff/bin/scribbu popm -a -A -b -o sp1ff@@pobox.com -C %playcount %full-file} every time it updates the play count sticker:

@smalllisp
(playcount_command . "/home/sp1ff/bin/scribbu")
(playcount_command_args . ("popm" "-a" "-A" "-b" "-o" "sp1ff@@pobox.com" "-C" "%playcount" "%full-file"))
@end smalllisp

The tokens @code{%playcount} & @code{%full-file} will be replaced with
the new play count and the absolute path to the file backing the
current song, respectively.

@node Generalized Commands
@section Generalized Commands

@cindex commands, generalized

The idea of executing arbitrary commands proved useful enough that
mpdpopm generalized it: the user can configure arbitrary server-side
commands in response to messages received on the @code{mppopmd}
commands channel. As an example, an entry in the configuration file
like this:

@lisp
  (gen_cmds .
            (((name . "set-genre")
              (formal_parameters . (Literal Track))
              (default_after . 1)
              (cmd . "/home/sp1ff/bin/scribbu")
              (args . ("genre" "-a" "-C" "-g" "%1" "%full-file"))
              (update . TrackOnly)))
@end lisp

will define a new command ``set-genre'', with two parameters, the second
of which can be omitted (it will default to the current track). When
@code{mppopmd} receives this command; i.e. when a client says something
like:

@example
sendmessage unwoundstack.com:commands "set-genre Rock"
@end example

@code{mppopmd} will invoke @command{scribbu} like so:

@example
/home/sp1ff/scribbu genre -a -C -g Rock "$@{music-dir@}/$@{song URI@}"
@end example

where the "psuedo-variables" @code{music-dir} and @code{song URI}
above will be replaced with the configured music directory and the
current song's URI.

The configuration is perforce more complex because we have to, at
configuration-time, define a mapping between the actual parameters
supplied by a client in the message to ``unwoundstack.com:commands''
and the replacement parameters used in the command arguments. The
command's replacement parameters are defined by a simple list, given
in @code{formal_parameters}, of parameter types. At this time, there
are only two formal parameter types:

@enumerate

@item
Literal: the actual parameter shall be copied verbatim into the
replacement parameters, under the name ``%i'' where i is the one-based
index of this formal parameter, expressed in base ten

@item
Track: the actual parameter will be interpreted as a song URI; it
again may be referred in the replacement parameters as ``%i''. Only
one Track argument may appear in the list of formal parameters.

@end enumerate

Actual parameters after index @option{default_after} (counting from
one) are optional; if not specified the replacement parameter will
take the default value for its type (the empty string for literals,
the currently playing song's URI for tracks).

Two additional parameters are available:

@enumerate

@item
current-file:: the absolute path to the currently playing track (if any)

@item
full-file :: if the list of formal parameters contains a Track
argument in slot i, the actual parameter will be interpreted as a song
URI, ``%i'' will return the absolute path to that file (i.e. with
@code{music_dir} prepended to the actual argument), as will
@code{%full-file}

@end enumerate

Finally, some commands (such as @command{set-genre}, above) may change
your music collection in such a way as to necessitate an MPD database
update after they complete. The @option{update} configuration item
governs that: it may be set to "NoUpdate", "TrackOnly", or
"FullDatabase" to indicate that this command will require no update,
an update to the song named by the Track parameter only, or the full
database, respectively.

@node Sample Configuration File
@chapter Sample Configuration File

@smalllisp
((log . "/home/mgh/var/log/mppopmd.log")
 (host . "192.168.1.6")
 (port . 6600)
 (local_music_dir . "/mnt/Took-Hall/mp3")
 (playcount_sticker . "unwoundstack.com:playcount")
 (lastplayed_sticker . "unwoundstack.com:lastplayed")
 (played_thresh . 0.6)
 (poll_interval_ms . 5000)
 (playcount_command . "/usr/local/bin/scribbu")
 (playcount_command_args . ("popm" "-v" "-a" "-A" "-b" "-o" "sp1ff@@pobox.com" "-C" "%playcount" "%full-file"))
 (commands_chan . "unwoundstack.com:commands")
 (rating_sticker . "unwoundstack.com:rating")
 (ratings_command . "/usr/local/bin/scribbu")
 (ratings_command_args . ("popm" "-v" "-a" "-A" "-b" "-o" "sp1ff@@pobox.com" "-r" "%rating" "%full-file"))
 (gen_cmds .
           (((name . "set-genre")
             (formal_parameters . (Literal Track))
             (default_after . 1)
             (cmd . "/usr/local/bin/scribbu")
             (args . ("genre" "-a" "-C" "-g" "%1" "%full-file"))
             (update . TrackOnly))
            ((name . "set-xtag")
             (formal_parameters . (Literal Track))
             (default_after . 1)
             (cmd . "/usr/local/bin/scribbu")
             (args . ("xtag" "-a" "-o" "sp1ff@@pobox.com" "-T" "%1" "%full-file"))
             (update . TrackOnly))
            ((name . "merge-xtag")
             (formal_parameters . (Literal Track))
             (default_after . 1)
             (cmd . "/usr/local/bin/scribbu")
             (args . ("xtag" "-m" "-o" "sp1ff@@pobox.com" "-T" "%1" "%full-file"))
             (update . TrackOnly)))))

@end smalllisp

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c mpdpopm.texi ends here
